This directory tree holds the current Swarm documentation in the raw
XML format.  In combination with the Swarm source corresponding to
this documentation, the html, dvi, PostScript and RTF formats may be
generated.

The file INSTALL in this directory gives detailed instructions on the
building and installation of the documentation.

----

Requirements:

Building this documentation requires a number of packages:

* jade - a DSSSL parser, takes the XML source included in this
  package, and the specified XML DTD and DSSSL stylesheets (see below) 
  to generate the desired back-end: html, tex and rtf.
* GNU emacs - used to parse the in-code documentation
* jadetex - version of tex equipped with macros generated by jade
* gs - Aladdin Ghostscript version 4.00 or later
* dvips - converts dvi documents to Postscript
* pngtopnm, pngtops - converts png files to pnm and ps files, respectively.
* cjpeg - compresses an image file to a JPEG file 

Two further packages are also required: 

* The DocBook XML DTD (V4.1.2)

The XML documentation is marked up using the DocBook XML V4.1.2 DTD
(formerly maintained by the Davenport Group - now maintained by
OASIS), aimed at computer documentation.  The current version can be
found at:

  http://www.oasis-open.org/docbook/

The Official Docbook documentation ("DocBook: The Definitive Guide" by
Norman Walsh and Leonard Muellner) is availabe at:

  http://docbook.org/

* The modular DocBook stylesheets 

The DocBook stylesheets are used to parse the Swarm XML in conjunction
with the DocBook DTD and generate the html, tex and rtf output.  The
current version required is listed in the Release Notes section in
NEWS and can be found at:

  http://docbook.sourceforge.net/

----

The file `configure' is a shell script to acclimate the creation of
the documentation to the oddities of your processor and operating
system.  It creates the file `Makefile' (a script for the `make'
program), which automates the process of building and installing the
documentation.  See INSTALL for more detailed information.

----

Note: The version numbers for Swarm documentation and source releases
are independent and can be increased without affecting the other
numbers.  Generally, at major releases, the version numbers will be
synchronised to match latest release of the source code.


           

