Welcome to the Swarm distribution. Full documentation should be found
in "swarmdocs-xxxxxx.tar.gz", in the same place as this distribution.
Documentation is also available on the Web at
  http://www.santafe.edu/projects/swarm/swarmdocs/

Full installation instructions are in the Swarm documentation. Very
briefly, you should edit Makefile.conf to point to the right
directories and run "make".

Setting the SYS makefile variable to one of {solaris,linux,hpux,sgi}
will pick up any standard system-dependent components or compilation
environment settings for those systems.  Other selections for those
settings may be made by modifying the Makefile.

For binary distributions, you will also need to set OTHERINCDIRS to include
X11 and Objective C include files; you will need to set OTHERLIBDIRS
to include X11 and Objective C libraries.

To run the output of a compile from the binary distribution, the user must
set the environment variable "TK_LIBRARY" and "TCL_LIBRARY" to the value
"$(SWARMHOME)/lib" so the canned tk/tcl routines can find required 
library functions.

For source distributions, you will need to set OTHERINCDIRS to include
tcl, tk, tclobjc, BLT, X11, and Objective C include directories; 
you will need to set OTHERLIBDIRS to include libraries for those subsystems
as well.

If you are using a binary distribution, you will have a make variable
"LDCONFIG" whose value is set to "bin".  This will cause your
applications link with "swarm.x"; "swarm.x" is an object module that
has all necessary swarm and system-specific libraries compiled into it
(with the exception of the X11 and Objective C runtimes, which must
still be provided as directed).

If you are using a source distribution, "LDCONFIG" will be set to
"archive", and it will be necessary to compile all swarm libraries, and
provide versions of tk, tcl, tclobjc, and blt runtime libraries.

Questions about this release should be directed to
<swarm-support@santafe.edu> This is a mailing list shared by all beta
developers.
